1)	Constitution is generally defined as:
A)	Law of the land.
B)	Fundamental law of the land.
C)	Administrative law of the land.
D)	Constitutional law of the land.
2)	Which of the following has been considered supreme as a source of power?
A)	Supreme Court of India.
B)	Parliament of India.
C)	President of India.	D) Constitution of India.
3)	What is the chief source of political power in India?
A)	The people.	B) The Constitution.
C)	The Parliament.
D)	The Parliament and State Legislatures.
4)	Who is the source of legal authority or sovereignty in India?
A)	People of India.	B) Constitution of India.
C) Parliament of India.	D) President of India.
5)	Ultimate sovereignty lies in:
A)	Parliament.	B) President.
C) Supreme Court.	D) People.
6)	On which date Constitution of India was adopted and enacted by the Constituent Assembly?
A) August 15, 1947.	B) January 26, 1950.
C) November 26, 1949.        D) January 30, 1948.
7)	Indian Constitution came into force on:
A) 26 Jan 1949.	B) 26 Jan 1950.
C) 15 Nov 1950.	D) 15 Aug 1947.
8)	The members of the Constituent Assembly were
A)	directly elected by the people.
B)	nominated by the Indian National Congress.
C)	nominated by the rulers of the Indian States.
D)	elected by the Provincial Assemblies.
9)	Provincial Constitution Committee of the Constituent Assembly had been chaired by:
A)	Jawahar Lal Nehru.	B) Sardar Patel.
C) Bishwanath Das.	D) None of these.
10)	Who of the following was the Permanent Chairman of the Constituent Assembly?
 

 


A) Dr. B.R. Ambedkar	B) Dr. Rajendra Prasad.
C) Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. D) Sardal Patel
11)	The Indian Constitution is
I.	an unwritten Constitution
II.	a written Constitution.
III.	largely based on the Government of India Act, 1935.
IV.	a gift of British Parliament. Of these statements:
A) II and IV are correct.	B) II and III are correct.
C) I and IV are correct.	D) I and III are correct.
12)	Among the following provisions, which one come into force soon after adoption of the Constitution on 26th November, 1949?
A)	Provisions relating to citizenship.
B)	Elections.
C)	Provisional Parliament	D) All of the above
13)	The salient features of the Indian Constitution provide for
I.	single citizenship for the whole of India.
II.	strictly federal form of Government.
III.	unique blend of rigidity and flexibility. Of the above statements:
A) I, II and III are correct. B) I and II are correct.
C) II and III are correct.	D) I and III are correct.
14)	Which one of the following is not a salient feature of the Constitutions of India?
A)	Written Constitution and supremacy of the Constitution
B)	Quasi-federal structure.	C) Committed judiciary.
D) Distribution of powers.
15)	The Constitution of India is:
A)	Partly rigid and partly flexible.
B)	Rigid
C)	Flexible.	D) Very rigid.
16)	The	President	of	India	has	the	same Constitutional authority as the:
A)	British Monarch	B) President of U.S.A.
C) President of Egypt.	D) President of Russia.
17)	In a Parliamentary system the Executive is responsible:
A)	Directly to the people.	B) To legislature.
 
C) To judiciary.	D) None of the above.
18)	India has Parliamentary Democracy because:
A)	Of distribution of power between the Centre and the States.
B)	The Council of Ministers is responsible to the Legislature.
C)	The Members of the Lok Sabha are elected by the public.
D)	Of a single constitutional framework.
19)	Which one of the following determines that the Indian Constitution is Federal?
A)	A written and rigid Constitution.
B)	An independent Judiciary.
C)	Vesting of residuary powers with the Centre.
D)	Distribution of powers between the Centre and the States.
20)	Which one of the following is the mandatory minimum requirement for a functional federation?
A)	States should be represented in the Upper House of the National Legislature.
B)	Judicial Review.
C)	Distribution of legislative and administrative powers between the two sets of Governments, National and State, so as to ensure the Independence of the Governments within their respective spheres.
D)	Distribution of legislative and administrative power between the two sets of Governments, National and State, to ensure independent but coordinated exercise of powers of the Government.
21)	The structure of the Indian Constitution is
A)	federal in form and unitary in spirit.
B)	unitary.
C)	unitary in form and federal in spirit.
D)	purely federal.
22)	The Constitution of India has created:
A)	A very weak centre.
B)	A very strong centre.
C)	A centre which is weak in normal times but very strong during emergencies.
D)	None of these.
23)	At the time of Emergency, the Indian State become …… from ……
A)	Federal, Unitary.	B) Unitary, Federal.
C)	Unitary, Unitary.
D)	Unitary, Quasi-federal.
24)	‘The Constitution establishes a System of Government which is almost quasi-federal’. This was a statement of:
A)	Sir Jennings.	B) Dr. B.R. Ambedkar.
C) Prof. K.C. Wheare.	D) Dr. Rajendra Prasad.
25)	The Constitution of India describes India as:
A)	A federation.	B) Quasi-federal.
C) A Union of States.	D) None of these.
 
26)	Our Constitution provides for the Constitution of the:
A)	Union.
B)	Union and all the States.
C)	Union and all the States except Jammu & Kashmir.
D)	Organs of Governments of Union and the States.
27)	Article 1 of the Constitution of India declares India a Union of States. The territory of this Union of States comprises:
A)	Union and States.
B)	Union territories and States.
C)	States, Union territories, and States which may join the Union.
D)	States, Union territories and Territories which may be acquired.
28)	In which year, Sikkim was associated in the Indian Union?
A) 1947.	B) 1975.
C) 1985.	D) 1871.
29)	Dealing with the Chapter of Citizenship under the Constitution, the Supreme Court has held that Sonia Gandhi, the President of Congress
(I) is not an Italian citizen, but is an Indian citizen because she is governed by:
A) Article 10.	B) Article 11.
C) The Citizenship Act, 1955. D) None of the above.
30)	The concept of Panchayati Raj has been introduced in our Constitution by the insertion of:
A)	Article 123.	B) Article 300A.
C) Article 243.	D) None of the above.
31)	The Panchayati Raj Administration is primarily aimed:
A)	To increase agricultural production.
B)	To ensure real development.
C)	To work for the upliftment of Harijans.
D)	To arouse in the people of each area intensive and continuous interest in the community development programme.
32)	Panchayati Raj System was adopted to:
A)	Make people aware of politics.
B)	Decentralize the power of democracy.
C)	Educate the peasants.
D)	To introduce a form of local self-government at the village, block and district levels.
33)	Panchayati   Raj,	as	introduced	in	1959, operates at:
A)	Samiti and Block Levels.
B)	Block and District Levels.
C)	Samiti and District Levels.
D)	Village, Block and District Levels.
34)	Panchayati Raj System was introduced in the two States; one was Rajasthan, the other was:
A)	Maharashtra.	B) Gujarat.
C) Andhra Pradesh.	D) Tamil Nadu.
 
35)	The 73rd Constitution Amendment Act, 1992 refers to the:
A)	Generation of gainful employment for the unemployed and the under-employed men and women in rural area.
B)	Generation of employment for the able bodied adults who are in need and desirous of work during the lean agricultural season.
C)	Laying the foundation for strong and vibrant Panchayati Raj Institutions in the country.
D)	Guarantee of right to life, liberty and security of person, equality before law and equal protection without discrimination.
36)	In whose time period, the Panchayats were given the constitutional status?
A)	Rajiv Gandhi.	B) Chandrashekhar.
C) V.P. Singh.	D) P.V. Narsimha Rao.
37)	The 73rd Amendment provides a   tier system of Panchayats:
A)	Three.	B) Four.
C) Two.	D) One.
38)	How Many seats are reserved in all Panchayats at all levels for women?
A)	One-fourth.	B) One-third.
C) One-half.	D) None of the above.
39)	The tenure of all Panchayats at all levels is:
A)	One year.	B) Two years.
C) Four years.	D) Five years.
40)	If a new State of the Indian Union is to be created, which one of the following Scheduled of the Constitution must be amended?
A)	First.	B) Second.
C) Third.	D) Fifth.
41)	Which one of the following statements correctly describes the Fourth Schedule of the Constitution of India?
A)	It lists the distribution of powers between the Union and the States.
B)	It   contains	the   languages   listed	in	the Constitution.
C)	It	contains	the	provisions	regarding	the administration of tribal areas.
D)	It allocates seats in the Council of States.
42)	The Eighth Schedule of Indian Constitution contains the:
A)	Fundamental Rights.	B) Directive Principles.
C)	A list of languages recognized by the Constitution.
D)	Number of States and Union Territories.
43)	Which one of the following Schedules of the Constitution of India contains provisions regarding Anti-Defection Act?
A)	Second Schedule.	B) Fifth Schedule.
C) Eighth Schedule.	D) Tenth Schedule.
44)	When Constitution was framed, the number of Schedules were:
A)	Eight.	B) Ten.
 
C) Twelve.	D) Eleven.
45)	Match List I and List II and select the correct answer by using the codes given below the lists:

List-I	List-II
(Features of the Indian Constitution)	(Borrowed from)
I.	Fundamental Rights.	A. UK.
II.	Parliamentary System of
Government.	B. USA.
III.	Emergency provisions.	C. Ireland.
IV.	Directive Principles of State Policy. D. German Reich.
E.	Canada.
A) I-B, II-D, III-E, IV-A.	B) I-E, II-A, III-D, IV-C.
C) I-B, II-A, III-D, IV-C.	D) I-A, II-B, III-D, IV-C.
46)	The Constitution of India borrowed the scheme of Indian Federation from the Constitution of:
A)	USA.	B) Canada.
C) USSR.	D) UK.
47)	The framers of the Constitution borrowed the idea of judicial review from the Constitution of:
A)	France.	B) USA.
C) United Kingdom.	D) None of the above.
48)	Which one of the following feature was not borrowed by the Indian Constitution from the British Constitution?
A)	Parliamentary system of Government.
B)	Rule of Law.	C) Election provisions.
D) None of the above.
49)	Which part of the Constitution of India talks about the Municipalities?
A)	Part IX.	B) Part IX (A).
C) Part X.	D) Part X (A).
50)	It is often said that the key to the minds of the makers of our Constitution lies in the:
A)	Preamble.	B) Fundamental Rights.
C)	Fundamental Duties.
D)	Directive Principles of State Policy.
51)	The aims and objectives of the Constitution have been enshrined in
A)	the Preamble.
B)	the Chapter of Fundamental Rights.
C)	the Chapter on Directive Principles of State Policy.
D)	all of the above.
52)	Preamble to the Constitution of India
A)	is not a part of the Constitution.
B)	indicates the objectives to be achieved.
C)	indicates the source from which the Constitution derives its authority.
D)	is a source of authority of the Constitution of India.
53)	The Preamble to the Indian Constitution is
 
A)	not a part of the Constitution.
B)	a part of the Constitution; but it neither confers any powers not impose any duties not can it be of any use in interpreting other provisions of the Constitution.
C)	a part of the Constitution and can be of use in interpreting other provisions of the Constitution in cases of ambiguity.
D)	a part of the Constitution and it confers powers and imposes duties as any other provision of the Constitution.
54)	The source of “we the people” in the Preamble is:
A)	United States.	B) United Kingdom.
C) United Nations.	D) None.
55)	The following are enshrined in the Preamble to the Constitution of India:
1.	Equality of status and opportunity.
2.	Liberty of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship.
3.	Justice-social, economic and political.
4.	Fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual.
5.	Unity and integrity of the Nation
Which one of the following is the  correct order in which they appear in the preamble?
A) 5 – 1 – 2 – 4 – 3.	B) 3 – 2 – 1 – 4 – 5.
C) 3 – 1 – 2 – 5 – 4.	D) 1 – 2 – 4 – 3 – 5.
56)	Which one of the following is in correct order in the Preamble of the Indian Constitution?
A)	Sovereign,	Socialist,	Secular,	Democratic, Republic.
B)	Sovereign,	Secular,	Socialist,	Democratic, Republic.
C)	Sovereign, Secular, Democratic, Secular, Republic.
D)	Sovereign,	Secular,	Democratic,	Socialist, Republic.
57)	The text of the preamble of the Constitution of India aims to secure
A)	fundamental rights to all individuals.
B)	fundamental duties of citizens of India.
C)	dignity of the individual and unity and integrity of the nation.
D)	security of service to government servants.
58)	Which amendment of the Constitution has added the words, ‘Secular’ and ‘Integrity’ in the Preamble to the Constitution?
A)	1st Amendment Act. B) 24th Amendment Act.
C) 42nd Amendment Act. D) 44th Amendment Act.
59)	How many times has the Preamble of the Constitution of India been amended so far?
A)	Twice.	B) Thrice.
C) Once.	D) Never.
60)	The word ‘secular’ denotes:
A)	Keeping away from all religions.
B)	Freedom of religion and worship to all citizens.
 
C)	Belief in one God.
D)	Practising different religions.
61)	The term “socialist” used in the Preamble means a State whose basic policy is to
A)	prohibit concentration of wealth.
B)	distribute equitably the natural resources.
C)	prohibit concentration of wealth and uplift the living standards of people.
D)	prohibit concentration of wealth and distribute equitably the natural resources.
62)	The term “Social Justice” used in the Preamble to the Constitution of India means:
A)	Removal of economic inequality.
B)	Provision for decent standard of living and removal of social inequality.
C)	Removal of inequality, raising standard of living and protection of interests of weaker sections.
D)	Protection of interests of weaker sections and removal of economic inequality.
63)	The word ‘Sovereign’ in the Preamble of the Constitution of India emphasizes that India is:
A)	A democratic and republic country.
B)	No more dependent upon any outside authority.
C)	Internally empowered to rule within the State territory.
D)	Not bound by external commands and the Government of India is equipped with the power to rule within India.
64)	‘Liberty, Equality and Fraternity’ is a slogan associated with
A)	American war of Independence.
B)	Chinese Revolution.	C) French Revolution.
D) Russian Revolution.
65)	The Preamble to the Constitution of India secures Justice, Liberty, Equality and Fraternity to
A)	all persons.
B)	those who reside within the territory of India.
C)	all citizens.
D)	those citizens who reside within the territory of India.
66)	Which one of the following pairs is correctly matched?
A)	Republic: Head of the State is hereditary monarch.
B)	Sovereign: Constitution rests on the people’s will.
C)	Democratic: Constitution does not recognize legal supremacy of another country.
D)	Secular: State is without any religion of its own.
67)	Who described the Part III of the Indian Constitution as “most criticized part of the Constitution?”
A)	Jawahar Lal Nehru. B) B.R. Ambedkar.
C) Dr. Rajender Prasad. D) B.N. Rau.
 

 
 
68)	The original Constitution classified Fundamental Rights into seven categories, but now
A)	there are six.	B) there are five.
C)	there are eight.
D)	they have been regrouped in three categories- social, economic and political.
69)	Right to Property in India is:
A)	Fundamental Right.	B) Legal Right.
C) Constitutional Right.	D) None of the above
70)	‘Right to property’ has been taken away from Fundamental rights a placed in Article 300 A through:
A)	24th Amendment.	B) 42nd Amendment.
C) 39th Amendment.	D) 44th Amendment.
71)	Which one of the following has been wrongly listed as a special feature of Fundamental Rights in India?
A)	Fundamental Rights are subject to reasonable restrictions.
B)	Fundamental Rights are more sacrosanct than rights granted by ordinary laws.
C)	Fundamental Rights are justiciable and can be enforced through Supreme Court.
D)	Fundamental Rights can be waived by a person.
72)	Fundamental rights are based on the:
A)	Bill of Rights (U.S.A).
B)	Bill of Rights (U.S.A.) with in-built limitations.
C)	Bill of Rights (U.K.).
D)	Bill of Rights (Canada).
73)	Fundamental	Rights	secured	to	the citizen/individuals is protected against:
A)	State action.
B)	State as well as private action.
C)	Against individual.	D) All of the above.
74)	Fundamental Rights are:
A)	Negative rights.	B) Restrictive rights.
C) Limited rights.	D) All of the above.
75)	Who enjoys the right to impose reasonable restrictions on the Fundamental Rights of Indian citizens?
A)	The Supreme Court. B) The Parliament.
C) The President.	D) None of these.
76)	Whether judiciary is the part of the ‘other authority’ in Art. 12 of the Constitution?
A)	Yes.	B) No.
C)	Both depend upon circumstances.
D)	None of the above.
77)	When an enactment is of such a nature that no separation is possible between inconsistent and consistent part:
A)	Whole Act will be operative.
B)	Whole Act will be inoperative.
C)	The Act will neither be operative nor inoperative.
D)	None of the above.
 
78)	A law, which abridges Fundamental Rights, is not a nullity but remains inoperative till the shadow of Fundamental Rights falls over such rights. This is known as the doctrine of:
A)	Pleasure.	B) Pith and substance.
C) Eclipse.	D) Severability.
79)	Under the Constitution the Doctrine of eclipse applies
A)	only to the pre-constitutional laws but only in respect of non-citizens.
B)	to the post-constitutional laws but only in respect of non-citizens.
C)	to the post-constitutional laws in respect of citizens only.
D)	to	all	laws,	pre-constitutional	and	post- constitutional.
80)	“Legal equality” under the Constitution of India implies that
A)	there should be equality amongst equals and inequality among inequals.
B)	everybody is equal before law.
C)	the State cannot enact different laws for different groups of people.
D)	there should be no special law for any category of people.
81)	The right to ‘equality before the  law’ contained in Article 14 of the Constitution of India is available to:
A)	Natural persons only.
B)	Legal persons only.
C)	Citizens of India.
D)	All persons whether natural or legal.
82)	Who is exception to equality before law (Article 14)?
A)	President.	B) Governors.
C) Both.	D) None.
83)	Indian Constitution permits discrimination on the basis of:
A)	Sex only.	B) Caste and sex only.
C)	Caste, sex and place of birth.
D)	Not on any ground.
84)	Reservation of seats in  educational institutions in favour of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is governed by:
A)	Article 15(4) of the constitution.
B)	Article 16(4) of the constitution.
C)	Article 29(2) of the constitution.
D)	Article 14 of the constitution.
85)	Article 15 prohibits discrimination on grounds only of:
A)	Religion, Race, Caste, Sex, Place of birth, Residence or any of them.
B)	Religion, Race, Caste, Sex, Place of birth.
C)	Religion, Race, Caste, Sex, Place of birth or any of them.
D)	None of the above.
 

 
 
86)	Prohibition	against	discrimination	under Article 15 is for:
A)	Persons.	B) Citizens.
C)	Citizens as well as non-citizens.
D)	Persons except aliens.
87)	For which of the following, can special provisions be made under Article 15 of the Constitution of India?
1)	Women and children.
2)	Scheduled Tribes.
3)	Economically backward classes.
4)	Socially backward classes.
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
A)	1, 2 and 4.	B) 1 and 3.
C) 2, 3 and 4.	D) 1, 2, 3 and 4
88)	Through which of the following provisions, does the Constitution of India explicitly prohibit racial discrimination in India:
A)	Article 14 and 17.	B) Article 17 and 23.
C) Article 15 and 16.	D) Article 17 only.
89)	Article 16 provides equally of opportunity in matters of public employment for:
A)	All citizens.	B) All persons.
C)	All persons except aliens.
D)	Citizen as well as non-citizens.
90)	Under Article 16(4) State is empowered to make provisions for reservations of appointments and posts for:
A)	Backward class of citizens.
B)	SCs/STs.
C)	Economically backward classes.
D)	Socially and educationally backward class of citizens.
91)	After the judgement of the Supreme Court in Mandal case, it has been observed that “The poisonous weed of casteism has been replanted where it will trouble us a thousand years. Each age will have to consider it.” This was observed by:
A)	Prof. Upendra Baxi.	B) N.A. Palkhiwala.
C)	Ram Jethmalani.
D)	Justice P.N. Bhagwati.
92)	Which of the following sections of citizens should be excluded from the benefits of reservations according to the principle of ‘Creamy Layer’ as propounded by the Supreme Court in the Mandal Commission judgement?
1.	Advanced	sections	among	the	Other Backward Classes.
2.	Advanced sections among the Scheduled Castes.
3.	Advanced sections among the Scheduled Tribes.
4.	Advanced sections among the economically backward classes.
 
Select the correct answer using the code given below:
A) 1 only.	B) 1 and 2.
C) 1 and 4.	D) 2 and 3.
93)	Tamil Nadu Reservation Act providing 69% reservation has been placed in which Schedule of the Constitutions?
A)	Sixth.	B) Seventh.
C) Eighth.	D) Ninth.
94)	Under which of the following the ‘Untouchability’ has been declared  abolished in India?
A)	Protection of Civil Rights Act.
B)	Schedule Castes and Schedule Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.
C)	Constitution of India.
D)	By all the above three
95)	Which of the following is included in Art, 19 (1)(a):
A)	Right to know.	B) Right to reply.
C) Right to silence.	D) All of the above.

KEY
1	B	2	D	3	A	4	B	5	D
6	C	7	B	8	D	9	B	10	B
11	B	12	D	13	D	14	C	15	A
16	A	17	B	18	B	19	D	20	C
21	A	22	B	23	D	24	C	25	C
26	C	27	D	28	B	29	C	30	C
31	D	32	D	33	D	34	C	35	C
36	D	37	A	38	B	39	D	40	A
41	D	42	C	43	D	44	A	45	C
46	B	47	B	48	C	49	B	50	A
51	A	52	C	53	C	54	C	55	B
56	A	57	C	58	C	59	C	60	B
61	D	62	B	63	D	64	C	65	C
66	B	67	B	68	A	69	B	70	D
71	D	72	B	73	A	74	D	75	B
76	A	77	B	78	C	79	D	80	A
81	D	82	C	83	D	84	A	85	C
86	B	87	A	88	C	89	A	90	D
91	B	92	A	93	D	94	C	95	D
